User Metering (#10789)
mendix/docs: content/en/docs/deployment/general/subscription-management/user-metering/_index.md

* Multi-App Internal User
* Single-App Internal User
* External User

For more information, refer to the [User Types and Definitions](/developerportal/deploy/licensing-apps-outside-mxcloud/#user-types-and-definitions) section of *Licensing apps*.

### Key Features

* Automatic tracking – User consumption is automatically tracked from the moment your app is deployed to production and becomes functional, ensuring real-time tracking. 
* Monthly reporting – Usage data is collected regularly, processed monthly, and is available in the Control Center.
* Application-level visibility – you get the detailed insights into named user counts for each application, helping you to identify optimization opportunities.
* License type classification – Users are classified by license type as External, Multi-App Internal, or Single-App Internal. This classification gives you accurate license tracking and helps optimize licensing costs. 
* Historical data – User metering provides you with access to usage data for all months since user metering was enabled.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe the remark about deployments should be added here.

"End-user metering is currently applied to applications deployed to Mendix Cloud and Mendix Cloud Dedicated environments."

Reviewer 2: historical data section is also relevant for control center.

Author: @JaapF, do you mean to add the remark about deployments under the **Key features** section as a new bullet?

Author: It does sound like a limitation, not a Key Feature. I may be wrong.

Reviewer: Is the glass half full oir half empty ;-).

Not an importnat comment. If we're keeping the alert box further up on this page, then you ignore this comment.
I had a slight preference to move it down.

## How User Metering Works

User metering in the Mendix cloud operates through a three-stage automated process, and it is enabled by default for apps deployed in Mendix Cloud environments. 

> 

Reviewer: Since this is the top-level document, I think the additional step "in-app data generation" should be added here as well.
I know we discussed this before and may have decided to not include that step here, I find myself disagreeing (again).

Reviewer: In this section we should add a reference to "implementing user metering" page.

Author: Alright. I got the **In-App User Classification** section back.

### Data Aggregation and Deduplication

At the end of each month, the Mendix Platform aggregates the collected data. Users are counted and rolled up to the app portfolio level. This process is detailed in the [User Aggregation and Deduplication](/developerportal/deploy/user-metering/#how-user-aggregation-and-deduplication-work) section below.

### User Classification and Reporting

Users are thereafter automatically classified in the following sequence:

1. External Users
2. Single-App Users
3. Multi-App Internal Users (default)

End-of-month usage reports are generated at the beginning of each month and are made available via the Control Center dashboard. The reports are generally available on the 1st of each month and reflect the previous month's usage.

## How User Aggregation and Deduplication Work

The user aggregation and deduplication process determines which user pack is consumed when a user accesses one or more of your applications. The process evaluates users in a sequence so that each user is counted according to the correct license pack without duplication. The classification follows the steps below:

> 

Reviewer: The headings says "deduplication" but the contents don't say anything about deduplication. I think it should be added as a first step.

Suggestion:
"Users are deduplicated based on common identifier values. A real-life person who has different identifier values in the aggregated data cannot be recognized as same user, so will be counted as multiple users. The deduplication mechanism evaluates 2 user attributes, see [section xyz]" (the section where we talk about system.user.name and userCommons.nameduseridentifier.value, etc,..

Author: If **deduplication** is the 1st step, should I change the heading to: **How deduplication and user classification work**?  @JaapF

Reviewer: classification is the next section, so i think the heading&content is good now.

### Classifying External Users

The first step is to determine whether a user is an external user:

* If the customer has a valid External User Pack subscription, and
* The user is explicitly marked as `External` within the application.

Then the User is classified as an External user.

Once classified, the user is licensed under the External User Pack and excluded from further classification steps. For more information, see the [User classification](/developerportal/deploy/implementing-user-metering/#user-classification) section of *Implementing Metering*.

> All remaining users are classified as `Internal` Users and further classified as described in the sections below.

Reviewer: Let's add:
"A multi-app user that is marked as internal in one app and is marked as external in another app will be counted as an internal user."

Reviewer 2: @JaapF I'd say this is internal logic. Why do we want to write it here and confuse the audience?

Reviewer: Well, this is a 'corner case'. Aim is to be very clear towards customers.
The point is: if customer apps are not consistently marking internal/external, what is the consequence?

Reviewer: To prove my point; this aspect came up in conversations with one of our customers.

### Classifying Single-App Internal Users

After `External` users are classified, the classification process further classifies the single-app internal users.

If the application is associated with a Single-App Internal User Pack, the user of the app will be classified as a single-app internal user. This user will be counted against the single-app internal user pack for that application.

For more details on how to assign single-app user packs to your apps, refer to the Assigning Single-App Internal User Packs section of the Control Center. <!-- Link from the Control Center doc -->

> 

Reviewer: I think we should add:
"An internal user that is using multiple apps, one of which being an app with a single-app user pack, will be counted as a single-app user and will be counted as another user for the other apps as well."

Satyam to confirm.

Reviewer 2: It can be a good note to add as an "info panel", after simplifying this sentence.

---
title: "User Metering"
url: /developerportal/deploy/user-metering/
weight: 20
description: "This document describes how user metering works."
---

## Introduction

Mendix uses end user metering to determine the number and type of users accessing applications in accordance with subscription agreements. Proper user classification ensures accurate reporting and optimal licensing costs for customers. <!-- *Proper user classification ensures accurate reporting, optimal licensing costs and transparency for both customers and Mendix. Customers can access Usage Report through the Control Center application on the Mendix Platform*. Link Usage Report from the Control Center doc -->

{{% alert color="info" %}}

> End user metering is currently applied to applications deployed to Mendix Cloud and Mendix Cloud Dedicated environments.

Reviewer 3: I believe "end-user" is the agreed upon spelling.

{{% /alert %}}

Mendix subscriptions include user-based pricing plans. With user-based pricing, customers purchase subscriptions based on the number of users who need access to their Mendix applications. Customers can purchase user subscriptions in the following categories:

* Multi-App Internal User
* Single-App Internal User
* External User

For more information, refer to the [User Types and Definitions](/developerportal/deploy/licensing-apps-outside-mxcloud/#user-types-and-definitions) section of *Licensing apps*.

### Key Features

* Automatic tracking – User logins are automatically tracked from the moment your application is deployed to production and becomes functional.
* Data processing – Usage data is collected, processed, and deduplicated regularly. <!-- Monthly reporting – Usage data is collected regularly, processed monthly, and is available in the Control Center. -->
* User subscription classification – Users are classified by user subscription type as External users, Multi-App Internal users, or Single-App Internal users. This classification yields accurate subscription tracking and helps optimize subscription costs. 

## How User Metering Works

> User metering in the Mendix cloud operates through a four-stage automated process, and it is enabled by default for apps deployed in Mendix Cloud environments. 

Reviewer 3: Should "the Mendix cloud" in fact be "Mendix Cloud"?

### In-App User Classification

> A key component of in-app user classification is maintaining a consistent user identifier. This becomes especially important when customers are using multi-app subscriptions. In the Mendix Multi-App Internal User Subscription and External User Subscription, the same individual may access multiple apps under a single subscription agreement. A unique, persistent user identifier ensures accurate tracking and prevents duplication. You are responsible for classifying users as `Internal` or `External`. For more detailed information, refer to the [User Classification](/developerportal/deploy/implementing-user-metering/#user-classification). 

Reviewer 3: 1/ apps > applications
2/ I would format **Internal** and **External** as bold (applies throughout, unless there's a different convention I'm not aware of).
3/ refer to the [User Classification] > refer to [User Classification] / refer to the [User Classification] section

Author: @NicoletaComan, in the In-App User Classification section, `Internal` and `External` are the values entered in the app.

At the end of each month, the Mendix Platform aggregates the collected data. Users are counted and rolled up to the application portfolio level. This process is detailed in the [User Classification and Deduplication](#classification-deduplication) section below.

### User Classification and Reporting

Users are thereafter automatically classified in the following user buckets based on your user subscriptions:

1. External Users
2. Single-App Internal Users
3. Multi-App Internal Users (default)

<!-- End-of-month usage reports are generated at the beginning of each month and are made available via the Control Center dashboard. The reports are generally available on the 1st of each month and reflect the previous month's usage. -->

## How User Classification and Deduplication Work {#classification-deduplication}

The user classification and deduplication process determines the user type and the number of users accessing one or more of your applications. The process evaluates users in a sequence so that each user is counted according to the correct subscription without duplication. The classification follows the steps below:

### User Identification (Deduplication)

> Users are deduplicated based on common identifier values. A user who has different identifier values in the aggregated data cannot be recognized as the same user and will be counted as multiple users. The deduplication mechanism evaluates two user attributes. When different values exist, Mendix treats them as different users. For more information, refer to [Guidelines for Unique User Identification (Deduplication)](/developerportal/deploy/implementing-user-metering/#guidelines-for-unique-user-identification-deduplication).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Users are deduplicated based on common identifier values. A user who has different identifier values in the aggregated data cannot be recognized as the same user and is counted as multiple users. The deduplication mechanism evaluates two user attributes. When different values exist, Mendix treats them as different users. For more information, refer to [Guidelines for Unique User Identification (Deduplication)](/developerportal/deploy/implementing-user-metering/#guidelines-for-unique-user-identification-deduplication).
```

Reviewer 3: I would suggest avoiding "will" in all similar scenarios below.

### Classifying External Users

The next step is to determine whether a user is an external user:

* If the customer has a valid External User Subscription, and
* The user type is explicitly marked as `External` within the application.

Then the user is classified as an external user.

Once classified, the user is licensed under the External User Subscription and excluded from further classification steps. For more information, see the [User classification](/developerportal/deploy/implementing-user-metering/#user-classification) section of *Implementing User Metering*.

> All remaining users are classified as `Internal` Users and further classified as described in the sections below.

Reviewer 3: I don't think "Users" needs to be capitalized.

{{% alert color="info" %}}

> A multi-app user who is marked as `Internal` in one app and `External` in another will be counted as an internal user. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A multi-app user who is marked as `Internal` in one app and `External` in another is counted as an internal user. 
```

> A multi-app user who is marked as `Internal` in one app and `External` in another will be counted as an internal user. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A multi-app user who is marked as `Internal` in one app and `External` in another is counted as an internal user. 
```

{{% /alert %}}

### Classifying Single-App Internal Users

After `External` users are classified, the classification process further classifies the single-app internal users.

> If the application is associated with a Single-App Internal User Subscription, the user of the application will be classified as a single-app internal user. This user will be counted against the Single-App Internal User Pack for that application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the application is associated with a Single-App Internal User Subscription, the user of the application is classified as a single-app internal user. This user is then counted against the Single-App Internal User Pack for that application.
```

<!-- *For more details on how to assign Single-App Internal User Pack to your apps, refer to the Assigning Single-App Internal User Packs section of the Control Center.* Link from the Control Center doc -->

{{% alert color="info" %}}

> An internal user accessing multiple apps, one of which is covered under a Single-App Internal User Pack, will be counted as a single-app internal user for that application and will also be counted separately for any other apps they use. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An internal user accessing multiple apps, one of which is covered under a Single-App Internal User Pack, is counted as a single-app internal user for that application and is also counted separately for any other applications they use. 
```
